This video is made possible by VI Sarah watches, luxury hands crafted watches,
fair prices.
You can check them out through the link below which historical figure Springs to
mind. When you hear the words,
the last king of the French we're guess it's probably Louie the 16th,
the long head far who lost his head in the French revolution.
But what if we told you that the story of Francis Kings didn't ends with the
guillotine slicing through Louis's neck in 1793?
What if we told you that France didn't say goodbye to its last king until
over 50 years later? Well,
it's time you met that king Louis Felipe was a man whose life turned on
revolution, born into an aristocratic family.
He survived the first French revolution that killed his father only to become
king in yet another revolution that toed his father's cousin as a figurehead of
the July monarchy,
he survived rebellions and Napoleonic cos before losing everything.
When the streets of Paris, once more rose up this time against him,
a lifelong liberal who became a dictator king,
an exile who grew up to rule the nation that exalt him. This is the complex,
fascinating life story of Louie Felipe. The last king of the French.
In the early hours of October, the sixth,
1789 fate handed the teenage Louis Felipe, a front row seat to history.
The previous evening,
a huge mob of women had gathered in Paris and set off for VAAI the opulence
palace of king Louis, the 16th of Maria Antoinette.
It was the early days of the French revolution,
not three months before the Bastille had fallen. And now here,
Louis Felipe was leaning out of a window on a cool October night as the women of
Paris forcibly dragged the king and his family back to the capital,
watching the procession of women passing below Louis Felipe had good reason to
be scared.
He was the eldest son of the duke de oar for cap king was his first cousin
once removed, but 16 year old Louis Felipe, he wasn't scat.
He was already planning to ride this wave of revolution to greatness born on
October the sixth, 1773,
Louis Fe Philipp had what you might describe as an unusual upbringing.
His father, the duke to oar was obsessed with social experimentation.
While of the Royal children were learning the basics of ruling Louis Felipe and
his siblings were contemplating strenuous physical tasks while reciting Jean
Jack Reau.
This meant a childhood that left the boy in excellent physical and mental shape
and the father with a reputation as a very UN Royal Royal, this reputation,
it turned out to be useful when the French revolution hit while other
aristocrats fled into exile,
the duke was elected to the revolutionary national assembly,
changing his name to Felipe Egal.
So when teenage Louis Felipe witnessed the 1789 women's March from dark cold
open, he didn't panic. Instead he joined the Jackon club.
That's the same Jackon club Ross Pierre came from and he also enrolled in the
French army. As France went to war with Austria in 1792,
Louis Felipe found himself soaring up the ranks,
eventually becoming attached to the staff of general Domar. At this stage,
it might have seemed like the revolution was a godsend for the oar family in
general area of 1793,
either duke or Filippi gala or whatever you want to call him.
He voted alongside the national assembly to execute his cousin Louis the 16th,
but this was just the family's high points,
like a roller coaster cart approaching the top of a peak.
The only way for the only on clan now was down in April of
1793,
Louis Felipe discovered general Doerre was plotting a coup while he didn't join
the plot. He also didn't report it, which became pretty awkward.
When the coup was uncovered as general DeRay and his fellow plots fled to
Austria, Louis Philipp was forced to flee alongside them.
Suddenly the Allon name was synonymous with counter revolution back in Paris,
the committee of public safety arrested the entire fan that November
Felipe Egal was guillotined Louis.
Felipe was hiding in Switzerland when he got the news that his father was dead
and that he now was the duke of oar for the rest of his life.
He would blame himself for his father's death.
The next few years were a turbulent time in Europe while Louis Felipe traveled
the consonants under an assumed name in France,
the Therma Orian reaction end did the reign of terror and sent Roberts Pierre to
the guillotine in the place of the revolutionary governments.
The directory rose up.
It was their agents who finally tracked Louis Felipe Denmark in 1796.
The directory wasn't as vicious as Roberts Pierre's goon squad. However,
they did not want an O running around Europe, especially now EXR Orian,
who are plotting to put the new duke on the French throne.
So they decided to make Louis Philipp an offer. He couldn't refuse
get out of Europe and we won't guillotine the rest of your family.
And that was how the future French king Louis Philipp.
He wounds up going to America,
Despite the directories fears, Louis Philipp,
he wasn't much of a threat when all the honest started plotting to overthrow the
directory and make him king.
The new duke was super clear that he wanted nothing to do with this hair brain
scheme. That may be why in 1800,
he was finally able to make peace with the comp OI.
The com was the younger brother of Louis the 16th,
the hit fled into Exar with his older brother, Louie the 18th,
right after the revolution exploded.
And he was now living in England when Louisie Philipp joins the comps.
After a couple of years in America,
the comps had every reason to hate the only on name.
Remember the last two had voted for his brother's execution,
the comps living brother,
Louie the 18th was even convinced that entire revolution had been an only honest
plot, but this was 1800.
The directory had now fallen with the situation in France, in flux.
The compt was determines that the Royal family rebuild their bridges.
So despite Louis the 18th being all like, well, uh, dude, no,
the comp invited Louise Philipp back into the fold.
Not that this reconciliation had much real world effect.
By the time the family made up Napoleon bona apart was firmly in control of
France. And no one was clamoring for a Royal return.
That was pretty much it for the next decade while Napoleon did his thing,
conquering everything in sight, Louise, Felipe potted around owns London,
doing whatever it is that Kings do in exile before he moved to Sicily to marry
Marie Antoinette's niece. And really his story,
it kind of could have ended there where it not for
18, 12, 18,
12 is the year that Napoleon made the classic dictator mistake of invading
Russia as is army ends, empire disintegrated around him.
It began to look like Napoleon. Wouldn't be leading France for very much longer.
All of this, it raised a potent question who would,
as the allies marched into Paris in April of 1814,
it wasn't clear who would get the restored French throne while Louie the 18th
was the obvious choice. There was a of all,
all honest movements in parts of French society that wanted duke to be king.
It didn't tell that Louis Fe Philipp kept quiet, right until the last second,
when he finally declared for Louis the 18th,
something that the duke was controlled into this by the comp more likely though,
the allies had a bit of a quiet word with him. Something like, uh, dude,
we do not need you screwing up our post Napoleon plans by starting a civil war.
Yo, anyway, Louis Felipe's late support for Louis.
The 18th definitely was not wholehearted during the hundred days when
Napoleon escaped El and returned to France, Louis Felipe lurked around Paris,
looking for all the world, like someone waiting to snatch the throne.
When Napoleon inevitably again, after Waterloo and Louis,
the 18th was restored for the second time.
Louis Felipe began lavishing gifts and patronage upon liberals looking for all
the world,
like someone trying to fashion himself as an attractive alternative king.
But the clearest indication we have about the Duke's ambitions came in September
of 1820. Earlier that year,
the comp art surviving son had been assassinated with his death.
Louis Felipe had become third in line to the throne,
but then it sounds out that the dead man had impregnated his wife before dying
seven months later, she gave birth to that child on re and just like that.
Louis Felipe was out of the running for king.
The news of the miracle baby gave Louis Felipe a breakdown.
He reportedly collapsed when the news reached him wa length that all would now
never amount to anything. It was a touch melodramatic and it was also untrue.
Nobody at that time had any way of knowing it.
But Louis Felipe was just one good revolution away from becoming king
On September the 16th, 1824 Louisie the 18th passed away in his place.
The com to OI assumed the French thrown under the name Charles the 10th.
But this time Louis Felipe had more or less given up on being king becoming
instead a big player on the business scene and of friends of the OI liberals in
the government's opposition.
Thus the duke who is perfectly placed to see just how quickly France sour on
Charles, the 10th back when Louis the 18th, that center in 1814,
a bunch of people in France had basically been like, whoa, whoa, whoa, uh,
time out right now. I want another corrupt Louis.
Luing over us with absolute power. That is not cool. Right?
So Louis the 18th had signed something called the charter of 1814,
semi that basically said the king shall not act like a gigantic.
Although Louis had thought the charter and outrage,
he stood by it out of necessity, realizing that chimes have changed,
but Charles, he didn't get the message.
Almost the first thing he did after being coronated was to figuratively bend
over and use the charter to wipe his bottom under Charles' ministry,
freedom of speech.
It was acts capital punishment for religious offenses was revived and the
franchise was restricted into not even the wealthy Bourge war could vote by 1830
Charles.
So close to being a dictator that his advisors actually advised that he launched
a Royal coup. So he did on Sunday, July the 25th,
1830 Charles published something known as the four ordinances.
This outlawed his opposition, and also freedom of the press.
His governments thought it was a master stroke.
The people of Paris thought differently that Monday,
the French capital trembled with unrest, there were protests,
anti monarchy chance. The smashing of property.
It might have died down of its own accord had Charles not sent in the army to
shoot some of the protestors. As an example,
it was as effective as suicide as if Charles had tied a rock to his neck and
dived head first into the sand. The next day, July the 27th, 1830 Paris.
It went up in flames across the Capitol.
Rats built barricades and armed themselves.
When the soldiers came storming in firefights erupted, there was carnage.
There was blood in the streets, outmaneuvered by the angry Persians.
The army simply had to abandon the city as they left.
The last thing Charles soldiers saw was the wide flag of the monarchy being torn
down and the revolutionary trick law hoisted in the air. And with that,
the July revolution had begun. So where you might ask,
where was Louis FA leap? Well,
not anywhere really the future king was hold up at his a stage,
trying his absolute best,
not to look like someone waiting around to snatch the thrown after Charles was
guillotines. It was his liberal opposition,
friends in Paris who were doing all of the work as Paris fell to the writers,
the upper OI businessman and opposition leaders, Louis Philipp,
surrounded himself with got together and decided that they needed to do
something. The July revolution had caught them all by surprise.
They were glad the street fighters of Paris seemed to want Tyran Charles gone,
but were equally terrified.
The next logical step would be a Roberts Pierre revival group wheeling out the
guillotine.
So they hatched a plan to make sure that this time the duke de succeeded in his
dreams of becoming king with most of the newspapers on their side,
they printed out posters,
declaring Paris was revolting and that the duke to oar was the last friend
of the people. Then they dispatched Ansary to Louis Fe Phillips' day,
who told him to get his to Paris and grab the opportunity that they just handed
him. Louis Felipe arrived in Paris just before midnight on Friday,
July the 30th, 1830 that's a evening.
Charles the 10th fled his palace ahead of a Lynch mob just like that.
The king was gone and the French throne was suddenly vacant.
Now all Louis Felipe needed to do was convince the writers to let him take it.
But before he get into all of that and believe me, it's all worth the wait.
I didn't want to tell you about our fantastic sponsor. Vince, Sarah watches.
I'm wearing a Viero right now. This one is a Viero chronograph,
as well as keeping perfect time. It's also got a timer.
These three back dials there. They don't just look great,
but they also serve a function.
Now I picked out a watch with a blue and silver combination, as you can see,
but there are loads of options on their website.
It'll be sure to find something that to your style and your wrist size,
I've got small little wrists. So they've got smaller models.
One of them fit me perfectly with summer coming up.
I'd also recommend you check up. Then you chiro mesh series.
They've got breathable straps.
So there's no sweating into it and getting all uncomfortable.
And these watches can also be dressed up or dressed down and fit with lots of
different styles. Also all the one bands on Viera watches are interchangeable.
So you can easily get a new look for your one. Watch.
You can also buy those watch straps separately.
Viera watches believe that luxury. Isn't about price or specification.
It's about detail and craftsmanship and Viera watches.
They've got a lot of that. Unlike many other watches on the market,
Viera is not about minimalist style. It's more about the classic,
good of a watch,
which something I love further by selling direct to the consumer Viera can
deliver a great watch at a much better price than you might be expecting to see
the full range, go to vier. Watch
its.com/biographics and use the code biographics on checkout for a special
discount. Thanks to Viera watches for sponsoring and let's crack on. Shall we
Have you ever had one of those mornings where you wake up,
remember what you did last night and then just immediately curl up into a ball
and start screaming. Well, that was Louis Felipe's morning on July the 31st,
1830.
When he realized it just toped his cousin once removed and willingly rode into
the middle of revolutionary Paris, Louis Felipe had a total meltdown.
He actually begs all those liberals who'd dragged in there not to make him king,
which must have seemed well, all sorts of ironic,
but there was no way he could back out.
Now the simple truth was that if someone didn't take this revolutionary bull by
the horns, the July revolution, it wasn't stop with Charles and well,
everyone present had all two real memories of the swish and funk sound of the
guillotine. In the end, Louis Philipp, he agreed to clear up the mess,
draping himself in the trickle law.
He rode out into the raging streets of Paris. Now this was dangerous.
No one in Paris had gone into this revolt because they desperately wanted to
replace one Doy king with another Royal lados by riding out like that.
Louis Philippe was putting himself at real risk of someone screaming that guy's
a duke cut off his head.
The reason that this didn't happen is largely thanks to the marque Del Lafa a
legendary French hero who played a significant role in both the American and
original French revolutions. The marque was respected by everyone,
even prisms street fighters.
When he met Louis Felipe outside the hotel to Villa and enthusiastically
embraced him, it sent a clear signal to Paris. The revolution was over,
not that Charles of the 10th that realized it though,
still alive with his head attached to his body.
The king was desperately scheming to get his family back onto the throne.
The plan he hits on was almost ingenious. The people wanted a new king. Well,
he'd give them one he'd abdicate for his grandson,
the miracle baby we mentioned earlier,
there was a cunning move that could have saved the B and line.
Unfortunately for Charles though, the idea came too late.
As Charles was AB advocating Paris was watching Louis Fe Philipp and the Marqui
laugh, waving the trickle law from a balcony, signaling the Dawn of a new era.
Any thoughts the people of Paris had of allowing another Boer take the throne.
It died that very day on August, the ninth, 1830 Louis Felipe was crowns.
It was agreed beforehand that he would take the title of king of the French
implying a public servant who looked after his people rather than the
traditional title of king of France, which implied a grumpy landlord,
angry with all of these peasants stinking up the place.
It was the moment Louis Felipe had been waiting for his entire life.
41 years ago,
the new king of the French had leaned out of a window and watched as Paris'
women marched king Louisie the 16th back from Versai. Now here,
he was wearing the crown. His long dead relative had lost to the guillotine.
He wasn't just the survivor of two French revolutions.
He was the beneficiary as Charles the 10th fled into Axel.
The establishments of Louis Fe Philipps,
July monarchy looked a a lot more like a new chapter in French role history.
One that would establish a new and glorious dynasty in a way. This was right.
It really was a new chapter for Francis monarchy, but it was also its last,
The July monarchy was popular for baby 23 minutes before reality hit the
problem was Louis Philipp had been put on the throne by a bunch of Bour
liberals, but the people who'd done all the fighting and dying during that July
revolution,
they were workers and they wanted progress to show for all that blood.
She Louis Fe Philipp failed to deliver on this spectacularly. Now sure.
He wasn't anywhere near resort radical. As Charles more people could vote.
Freedom of the press was guaranteed and the government had a healthy opposition.
But if you were some unemployed, Persian street fighter,
less autocratic than the last guy, wasn't exactly what you'd been fighting for.
In the first few years of his existence,
the July monarchy had to face down all manner of threats.
There was a Bonna artist plot to topple Louis Fe Philipp and put one of
Napoleon's relatives on the throne.
There was also a legitimate uprising to topple Louis Fe Philipp and replace him
with Charles's grandson. There was also the infamous June rebellion of 1832.
The one li IAB is based upon this PR uprising left 800 people.
Ironically though,
all these attempted revolts actually shore up Louis Philipp's support faced with
the prospect of a not great Monarch or the workers wheeling out the guillotine.
The middle classes always chose the monarchy,
but there was one man who saw in the July monarchy,
not a bull work against terror, but a golden opportunity. Yep.
It's time to welcome into this story. Uh, all friends, Napoleon III,
if you'll no doubt recall, if you saw our previous video about him,
Napoleon II was the Exel nephew of the original Napoleon.
Now living under the insane delusion that he should be emperor of France.
He was also a gigantic pain in Louis Felipe's dairy air in
1836 when Louis Felipe was desperately trying to shore up support.
Napole a third launched a tragically inept co in Strassburg that succeeded only
in embarrassing everyone.
When Louis Felipe tried to return Napoleon the first SAS to France in 1814,
Napoleon the third was there again,
soaking up the limelight by launching yet another co so incompetent that even
anti Bonna apart felt sorry for him,
unable to deal with the bad publicity executing a living to Napoleon.
The first would bring Louis. Felipe simply had the wannabe emperor locked up,
but he could afford to be lenient on crazy old Napoleon thei in 1840.
By that point, the July monarchy, it was no longer really unpopular.
This was more of an accident than any grand's plan on Louis Felipe's part
between 1840 and 1846,
France had experienced an economic boom that hoist up living standards and kept
the middle classes happy. But even during these house, young days,
the warning signs,
they were there for the monarchies future Louis Philipp's most important
minister was a guy called Fran.
Gizo the conservative iron fist in the Kings soft liberal glove.
As the economy boomed Gizo used precisely none of that money to support the
lower classes,
those and women who mans the barricades during the July revolution.
Well they got squat. It wasn't just money. They didn't get,
although one of the July monarchies resort Etro was to enlarge the franchise
that had been so restricted under Charles voting was still only something that
the 1% could do.
The rest of the country was starting to wonder why they were voices were not
being hurt. And that's where things were as 1846 rolled into view.
The July monarchy was popular. Ish,
just so long as the good times kept on rolling and no massive shark upset the
precarious foundation of sands that Louis Felipe had built his Royal house on.
But this is Louis.
Felipe were talking about the king whose life and on revolutions little did the
king of the French know, but he was fast approaching his final one
On January the 29th, 1848,
Alex de Tove got to his feet in the French chamber of deputies and made a
prophetic speech. I'm told there is no danger because there are no riots.
I am told that because there is no visible disorder on the surface of society.
There is no revolution at hand. Gentlemen,
permit me to say that I believe you are deceived.
This is my profound conviction. I believe that we are at this moment,
sleeping on April volcano. It was two years on from where we last left.
Louis Felipe hoping the good times would never stop rolling.
In fact that not stopped rolling. The entire cart had fallen to pieces.
1846 had seen a major recession hit France.
There are millions out of work at the same time,
a great famine had swept Europe making life so painful that the decade became
known as the hungry forties.
This was the volcano that taco Ville was talking about.
A France boiling with invisible rage,
hidden by a restrictive franchise that locked most people out of power.
Only the discontent. It wasn't entirely invisible.
The previous year opposition deputies had begun organizing banquets across
France in order to air their grievances under the July monarchy protest was
illegal.
So private banquets that just happened to feature political speeches were away
around this law.
Tens of thousands attended among them Friedrich Engels of the communist
manifesto by January, 1848. Though, the banquet campaign has mostly fizzled out.
The organizers decided to put together one last grands,
one in Paris to cap off the year's work. Only this banquet.
It didn't go ahead fed up with even this limited freedom of speech,
the Gizo government banned at the last second. This was a big deal.
Even under the July monarchy people, they had a right to assemble.
After some debate,
the organizers decided to reschedule for February the 20 seconds.
They would hold a symbolic banquet just to prove that they still had rights and
then disperse without making any political speeches.
That was how on February the 22nd,
1848 Paris found itself hosting thousands upon thousands of super
politicized,
angry and primed to believe that canceling the day's banquet would signal the
complete stripping of their rights.
If you've watched our other 19th century videos,
you may have heard a joke before about how a ban on banquet somehow sparked a
revolution in France in 1848. Well,
this is how faced with all these hostile people, right in the heart of Paris.
Gizo canceled the banquet. Anyway,
these hostile people then did what Banque hostile people tend to do within hours
of the cancellation barricades were springing up across the city workers.
They were arming themselves by the morning of February,
the 23rd Paris was a gigantic Tinder box.
The city was paralyzed by crowds.
Ding Gizo head terrified by what he had unleashed Gizo resigned,
but then some random soldier decided to throw a match onto the highly
combustible situation by opening fire on the crowds that had gathered to hear GI
O's resignation. When the smoke cleared 52 Persians were dead.
This massacre, when it caused the volcano to blow its top by Dawn of February,
the 24th, the French capital, it was out of control.
The army was muting and the national guard were joining the revolutionaries
today.
Some historians think that if Louis Felipe had ordered loyal regimens of the
army to attack the city that July monarchy could have survived.
But here's the thing about Louis Philippe at heart.
He wanted to be loved for all of his faults. This was a man who,
when king had wandered the streets of Paris in a businessman's suit,
shaking hands with his subjects. He was ambitious. Yes,
but he also genuinely believed that he was popular to cast that last illusion
aside by attacking Paris, it was was just simply a step too far. That date,
February the 24th, 1848, Louie Felipe abdicated the French crown.
At the last moment,
he tried to take a leap from Charles the tenths playbook and make his grandson
king.
But what hadn't worked for Charles did not work for Louie Felipe on February the
26th, 1848 with France in revolt,
the French monarchy was abolished for are good. There would be no more Kings,
no more Queens. The last chapter of the monarchy attended not in glory,
but with Louis Philipp fleeing into aile. However,
there was a postscript across Europe, the July monarchies collapse.
It triggered a wave of revolutions in Austria, Hungary, Italy,
and PRUs old certainties.
They were now swept away and new stories were written back in France.
The end of Louisie Felipe story.
It wounds up being the start of another man's that's right it's time for
Napoleon the third to step back into the spotlight.
Within months of Louis Felipe's fall,
the bumbling co plotter was riding this latest wave of revolution just as
Louie Felipe had with the July revolution on December the 10th nap in the third
became the first ever president of France. Not four years later,
he declared himself emperor for life.
As an apparently in the third was snatching Louis Philipp's crown.
Now with extra Imperial trimming. The one time duke was settling into a short,
unhappy retirement in England. And we mean short on August the 26th, 18, 15,
not three years after his final Revolut and Louis Philipp passed away.
He was 76. So was Louis Philipp, a tyrant schema? What was he just done?
Lucky, maybe more likely. He was just an anachronism,
a man who decided that he had one day be king and fulfilled their dream just as
France was deciding that it no longer needed a monarchy today.
The last king of the French is little more than a footnote in history,
but we shouldn't let that distract us from the miracle that was Louis Felipe's
turbulent life. He was a man who survived three separate French revolutions.
Three times. He found himself at the epicenter of European history in the end,
his entire life was perhaps no different from that of the 16 year old boy
that had once bin,
the boy who leaned out of his window above the women's March on Versai
determined to witness history. So I really hope you found that video.
Interesting. If you did,
please do give us a thumbs up below and don't forget to subscribe.
We've got brand new videos, just like this several times a week.
Also please do check out our great sponsor Viero watches.
You will find them below and as always, thank you for watching.